add episodes on estimate superspreading and simulate chains (trial 04) (#29)
epiverse-trace/tutorials-middle: episodes/superspreading-estimate.Rmd

<!-- we want -->

In this tutorial, we are going to estimate the individual variation in transmission and assess its heterogeneity, which often results in superspreading events. Also, we are going to use these estimates to account for superspreading in contact tracing interventions.

We are going to use data from the `{outbreaks}` package, manage linelist and contacts data using `{epicontacts}`, and estimate distribution parameters with `{fitdistrplus}`. Lastly, we are going to use `{superspreading}` to account for it in decision-making.

We’ll use the pipe `%>%` to connect some of their functions, so let’s also call to the `{tidyverse}` package:

```{r,message=FALSE,warning=FALSE}
library(outbreaks)
library(epicontacts)
library(fitdistrplus)
library(superspreading)
library(tidyverse)
```

## The individual reprodution number

> Reconstruction of transmission trees (whom infected whom) can provide an understanding of who contributes more to transmission. This can be done with detailed case investigations and/or genetic data ([Cori et al., 2017](https://royalsocietypublishing.org/doi/10.1098/rstb.2016.0371))

Author: this change was also added in https://github.com/epiverse-trace/tutorials-middle/pull/29/commits/3e536a4a6406e5618c8e102c984ff6a9dbfe40f9

> Let's use the `mers_korea_2015` linelist and contact data from `{outbreaks}` with `{epicontacts}` to get the distribution of secondary cases ([Campbell, 2022](https://community.appliedepi.org/t/estimating-the-degree-of-super-spreading-from-transmission-chain-data/103/2)):

Author: added in https://github.com/epiverse-trace/tutorials-middle/pull/29/commits/a8d2b893882f8586c78932711a492c1037ad062d

epicontacts::vis_epicontacts(epi_contacts)
```

```{r,echo=FALSE}
# visualise contact tree
network <-
  vis_epicontacts(epi_contacts) %>%
  visNetwork::visPhysics(solver = "barnesHut")

fname <- "network.html"

visNetwork::visSave(network, fname)

webshot::webshot(
  fname,
  delay = 5,
  zoom = 10
)
```

::::::::::::::::::::::::::: spoiler

### Is contact data tidy?

Contact data contains information of whom infected whom. We expect to have the infector (`from`) and the infectee (`to`) plus additional columns of variables related to their contact like location (`exposure`) and date of contact.

Following [tidy data](https://tidyr.tidyverse.org/articles/tidy-data.html#tidy-data) principles, in contact data the observation unit is the **infector-infectee** pair. Although one infector can infect multiple infectees, from contact tracing investigations we may record infectees contacts with more than one infector. But we should expect to have unique infector-infectee pairs.

We can check on replicates for infectees:

```{r}
# no infector-infectee pairs are replicated
epi_contacts %>%
  pluck("contacts") %>%
  group_by(to) %>%
  filter(n() > 1)
```

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::

> When each infector-infectee row is unique, the number of entries per infector corresponds to the number of secondary cases.

Author: added in https://github.com/epiverse-trace/tutorials-middle/pull/29/commits/93ea590b063af03b7d0391f0c39e94f5bad45149

```{r}
# count secondary cases per infector
infector_secondary <- epi_contacts %>%
  pluck("contacts") %>%
  count(from, name = "secondary_cases")
```

> The number 

Author: yes, this text now connects the previous two chunks https://github.com/epiverse-trace/tutorials-middle/blob/3e536a4a6406e5618c8e102c984ff6a9dbfe40f9/episodes/superspreading-estimate.Rmd#L135-L141

```{r,message=FALSE,warning=FALSE}
epi_secondary <-
  epi_contacts %>%
  # extract ids in contact *and* linelist
  # using "which" argument
  epicontacts::get_id(which = "all") %>%
  enframe(name = NULL, value = "from") %>%
  # join count secondary cases per infectee
  left_join(infector_secondary) %>%
  # infectee with missing secondary cases
  # are replaced with zero
  replace_na(
    replace = list(secondary_cases = 0)
  )

# arrange in descendant order of secondary cases
epi_secondary %>%
  arrange(desc(secondary_cases))

## plot the distribution
epi_secondary %>%
  ggplot(aes(secondary_cases)) +
  geom_histogram(binwidth = 1) +
  labs(
    x = "Number of secondary cases",
    y = "Frequency"
  )
```

> The _individual reproductive number_, ν, is defined as a random variable representing the expected number of secondary cases caused by a particular infected individual. 

Author: added in https://github.com/epiverse-trace/tutorials-middle/pull/29/commits/70aa7a09021d58ff1aee5664ae788cdd6bb0b353

> Values for ν are drawn from a continuous probability distribution with population mean $R_{o}$ that encodes all variation in infectious histories of individuals, including properties of the host and pathogen and environmental circumstances. 

Author: added in https://github.com/epiverse-trace/tutorials-middle/pull/29/commits/4552c9eac853f281eec4a83c665bc78ebb7ffd92

> In this framework, superspreading events (SSEs) are not exceptional events, but important realizations from the right-hand tail of a distribution of ν ([Lloyd-Smith et al., 2005](https://www.nature.com/articles/nature04153)).

Author: added in https://github.com/epiverse-trace/tutorials-middle/pull/29/commits/808781d36a2fdc72088d01c895bedada9e9e51f3

> ```{r,echo=FALSE,message=FALSE,warning=FALSE}

Author: yes, the text includes a connection between figures https://github.com/epiverse-trace/tutorials-middle/blob/3e536a4a6406e5618c8e102c984ff6a9dbfe40f9/episodes/superspreading-estimate.Rmd#L177-L181

# Load parameters
mpox <- epiparameter::epidist_db(
  disease = "SARS",
  epi_dist = "offspring_distribution",
  single_epidist = TRUE
)
mpox_params <- epiparameter::get_parameters(mpox)
# mpox_params

# calculate density fit
fit_density <-
  tibble(quantile = 0:40) %>%
  mutate(
    density = dnbinom(
      x = quantile,
      mu = mpox_params["mean"],
      size = mpox_params["dispersion"]
    )
  )

# plot offspring distribution with density fit
ggplot() +
  geom_line(
    data = fit_density,
    mapping =
      aes(
        x = quantile,
        y = density
      )
  ) +
  geom_vline(
    aes(xintercept = mpox_params["mean"]
    ), lty = 2
  ) +
  annotate(
    "text", label = "mean Ro",
    x = mpox_params["mean"] + 5,
    y = 0.5,
    size = 8,
    colour = "red"
  ) +
  labs(
    x = "Individual reproductive number",
    y = "Density"
  )
```

## Estimate the offspring distribution

> Stochastic effects in transmission are modelled using a Poisson process4, so that the number of secondary infections caused by each case, Z, is described by an ‘offspring distribution’ Pr(Z = k) where Z∼Poisson(ν).

Author: This introduction changed. The poisson distribution is now detailed in two sections

https://github.com/epiverse-trace/tutorials-middle/blob/3e536a4a6406e5618c8e102c984ff6a9dbfe40f9/episodes/superspreading-estimate.Rmd#L245-L257

https://github.com/epiverse-trace/tutorials-middle/blob/3e536a4a6406e5618c8e102c984ff6a9dbfe40f9/episodes/superspreading-estimate.Rmd#L666-L674

> By considering three possible distributions of ν, we generate three candidate models for the offspring distribution: (1) in generation-based models neglecting individual variation, ν = R0 for all cases, yielding Z∼Poisson(R0); (2) in differential-equation models with homogeneous transmission and constant recovery rates, ν is exponentially distributed, yielding Z∼geometric(R0); (3) in a more general formulation, we let ν be gamma-distributed with mean R0 and dispersion parameter k, yielding Z∼negative binomial(R0,k) (ref. 23). The negative binomial model includes the conventional Poisson (k → ∞) and geometric (k = 1) models as special cases. It has variance R0(1 + R0/k), so smaller values of k indicate greater heterogeneity.

Author: not. the explanation was simplified. text edit was used in https://github.com/epiverse-trace/tutorials-middle/pull/29/commits/978a1b03fde6f0e15de290974f02b08cd4bc53d1

> the offspring distribution, 

Author: this was used in this callout https://github.com/epiverse-trace/tutorials-middle/blob/3e536a4a6406e5618c8e102c984ff6a9dbfe40f9/episodes/superspreading-estimate.Rmd#L408-L420

    - R0 as the mean and 
        + average number of (secondary) cases produced by a single individual in an entirely susceptible population
    - k as the dispersion parameter, 
        +degree of heterogeneity in transmission by single individuals

fit distribution to data using {fitdistrplus}
provide maximum likelihood estimates

the estimated value of k
suggest that
SSE are an expected feature of the
individual level variation in infectiousness

```{r}
library(fitdistrplus)

## fit distribution
offspring_fit <- epi_secondary %>%
  pull(secondary_cases) %>%
  fitdist(distr = "nbinom")

offspring_fit

## extract the "size" parameter
mid <- offspring_fit$estimate[["size"]]
```

```{r,echo=FALSE}
## calculate the 95% confidence intervals using the standard error estimate and
## the 0.025 and 0.975 quantiles of the normal distribution.
lower <- mid + offspring_fit$sd[["size"]] * qnorm(0.025)
upper <- mid + offspring_fit$sd[["size"]] * qnorm(0.975)
```

We can see that the
dispersion parameter is estimated as
`r round(mid, 3)` (95% CI `r `round(lower, 3)` - `r round(upper, 3)`).

As this value is significantly lower
than one, we can conclude that

> the degree of super-spreading is high.

Author: added in https://github.com/epiverse-trace/tutorials-middle/pull/29/commits/734e0cdd2be7d24bfac2089964b56b277cf38132

This is in line with visual inspection
of the histogram made above.

```{r,echo=FALSE}
# calculate density fit
fit_density <-
  tibble(quantile = 0:40) %>%
  mutate(
    density = dnbinom(
      x = quantile,
      mu = offspring_fit$estimate[["mu"]],
      size = mid
    )
  )

# plot offspring distribution with density fit
ggplot() +
  geom_histogram(
    data = epi_secondary,
    mapping =
      aes(
        x = secondary_cases,
        y = after_stat(density)
      ),
    binwidth = 1
  ) +
  geom_point(
    data = fit_density,
    mapping = aes(x = quantile, y = density),
    alpha = 0.3, color = "red"
  ) +
  labs(
    xlab = "Individual reproduction number",
    ylab = "Number of individuals"
  )
```

::::::::::::::::::::::: callout

> ### Transmission heterogeneity

Author: Agree. For homogeneity, let's use individual-level variation in transmission. I added a callout box at the end referring to heterogeneous, which is a term that can also be found in the literature. Added in https://github.com/epiverse-trace/tutorials-middle/pull/29/commits/3e536a4a6406e5618c8e102c984ff6a9dbfe40f9

> Heterogeneity is in the variance of the number of secondary cases generated by each infected individual

Author: Agreed. homogenized in https://github.com/epiverse-trace/tutorials-middle/pull/29/commits/3e536a4a6406e5618c8e102c984ff6a9dbfe40f9

[add table quick summary]

:::::::::::::::::::::::

::::::::::::::::::::::: challenge

read ebola contact data and estimate R and dispersion?

:::::::::::::::::::::::

## Interpret the dispersion parameter

<!-- from draft -->

- for occurrences of associated discrete events we can use Poisson or negative binomial discrete distributions.
- in a Poisson distribution, mean is equal to variance.
- when variance is higher than the mean, this is called over-dispersion.
- in biological applications, over-dispersion occurs and so a negative binomial may be worth considering as an alternative to Poisson distribution.

- in epidemiology, negative binomial have being used to model disease transmission for infectious diseases where the likely number of onward infections may vary considerably from individual to individual and from setting to setting

> - In a sequence of independent Bernoulli trials, in each trial the probability of success is $p$ and of failure is $1-p$. We observe this sequence until a predefined number $r$ of successes occurs. Then the random number of observed failures follows the negative binomial distribution.

Author: I adapted some of this content to this spoiler with the aim of connecting the concepts of poisson, overdispersion and NB for the ones that needed it. You assessment of this will also be helpful

https://github.com/epiverse-trace/tutorials-middle/blob/3e536a4a6406e5618c8e102c984ff6a9dbfe40f9/episodes/superspreading-estimate.Rmd#L244-L258

:::::::::::::::::::::::: callout

### Use {epiparameter}

```{r,message=FALSE,warning=FALSE,echo=FALSE}
library(epiparameter)

epidist_string <- epidist_db(
  epi_dist = "offspring distribution"
) %>%
  list_distributions() %>%
  dplyr::select(disease) %>%
  distinct() %>%
  pull() %>%
  paste(collapse = ", ")
```

Currently, `{epiparameter}` have offspring distributions for `r epidist_string`. Let's access the offspring distribution `mean` and `dispersion` parameters for SARS:

```{r,message=FALSE,warning=FALSE}
# Load parameters
sars <- epidist_db(
  disease = "SARS",
  epi_dist = "offspring distribution",
  single_epidist = TRUE
)
sars_params <- get_parameters(sars)
sars_params
```

::::::::::::::::::::::::

:::::::::::::::::::::::: callout

### Select the best model

Assess fit performance w/ model comparison AIC, BIC

Using Information criteria for the best fit. Read further in vignette using helper functions

<https://epiverse-trace.github.io/superspreading/articles/estimate_individual_level_transmission.html>

:::::::::::::::::::::::::

## Evidence for variation in individual reproductive number

> Comparing our findings to the 20/80 rule proposed for sexually transmitted and vector-borne diseases, no general rule emerges but the core principle of heterogeneous transmission is certainly supported (Fig. 1c).

Author: text added in https://github.com/epiverse-trace/tutorials-middle/pull/29/commits/e7625be974c60999dc2a5b1b2919a4d7c285ba6d

- focus on the cumulative probability distribution of the most infectious cases
    + if there is a 0.2 proportion of (the most infectious) cases contributing to the 0.8 proportion of transmission, this is a highly heterogeneous distribution. (e.g. SARS)
    + if there is a 0.6 proportion of (the most infectious) cases contributing to the 0.8 of transmission, this is a less heterogeneous distribution (compared to the above one, e.g. pneumonic plague)

![Proportion of transmission expected from the most infectious 20% of cases, for 10 outbreak or surveillance data sets (triangles). Dashed lines show proportions expected under the 20/80 rule (top) and homogeneity (bottom). Superscript ‘v’ indicates a partially vaccinated population.](fig/SEE-individual-reproductive-number-fig-c.png)

> The comparison of directly transmitted infections reveals the differing degree of individual variation among diseases and outbreak settings. Like SARS, measles in highly vaccinated populations shows high variation, with heterogeneous vaccination coverage as an important environmental factor contributing to this pattern. Monkeypox and smallpox viruses show intermediate variation, consistent across multiple data sets, and pneumonic plague transmission is slightly less variable.

Author: should we use the string "SARS-1"? we only refer to "SARS-CoV-2" in the introduction.

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: challenge

What is the proportion of cases that are responsible of the 80% of transmission?

Compare between SARS, MERS, Ebola

::::::::::::::::::::: hint

Use `proportion_transmission()`

:::::::::::::::::::::

::::::::::::::::::::: solution

```{r}
# estimate
# proportion of cases that
# generate 80% of transmission
proportion_transmission(
  R = sars_params[["mean"]],
  k = sars_params[["dispersion"]],
  percent_transmission = 0.8
)

## assessment ---------------------------------

# estimate
# proportion of cases that
# generate 80% of transmission
proportion_transmission(
  R = offspring_fit$estimate["mu"],
  k = offspring_fit$estimate["size"],
  percent_transmission = 0.8
)

## assessment --------------------------------------------------------------

#' estimate for ebola

```

:::::::::::::::::::::

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

::::::::::::::::::::::::: callout

### Define Superspreading events

> Lloyds propose a general protocol for defining a superspreading event:

Author: added in https://github.com/epiverse-trace/tutorials-middle/pull/29/commits/3181278c2849a6ae5c123c841d13f89f0fa7eef8

- define an SSE as any infected individual who infects more than Z(n) others, where Z(n) is the nth percentile of the Poisson(R) distribution. 
- A 99th-percentile SSE is then any case causing more infections than would occur in 99% of infectious histories in a homogeneous population

```{r}
qpois(
  p = 0.99,
  lambda = offspring_fit$estimate["mu"]
)
```

![Reported superspreading events (SSEs; diamonds) relative to estimated reproductive number R (squares) for twelve directly transmitted infections. Lines show 5–95 percentile range of Z∼Poisson(R), and crosses show the 99th-percentile proposed as threshold for SSEs. Stars represent SSEs caused by more than one source case. ‘Other’ diseases are: 1, Streptococcus group A; 2, Lassa fever; 3, Mycoplasma pneumonia; 4, pneumonic plague; 5, tuberculosis. R is not shown for ‘other’ diseases, and is off-scale for monkeypox.](fig/SEE-individual-reproductive-number-fig-d.png)

::::::::::::::::::::::::

## Backward and forward contact tracing

> Contact tracing can be deployed in multiple strategies. Forward tracing targets downstream individuals who may be infected by index individual. Backward tracing targets the upstream primary case who infected the index case (or a setting or event at which the index case was infected) by retracing history of contact to the likely point of exposure up to the upper bound of the incubation period.

Author: added in https://github.com/epiverse-trace/tutorials-middle/pull/29/commits/463c3de43088b589f9e5d012525590f45eb87124

When there is evidence of individual-level variation (i.e. overdispersion), often resulting in so-called superspreading events, a large proportion of infections may be linked to a small proportion of original clusters. As a result, finding and targeting originating clusters in combination with reducing onwards infection may substantially enhance the effectiveness of tracing methods [Endo et al., 2020](https://wellcomeopenresearch.org/articles/5-239/v3). 

Empirical evidence focused on evaluating the efficiency of backward tracing lead to 42% more cases identified than forward tracing supporting its implementation when rigorous suppression of transmission is justified ([Raymenants et al., 2022](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41467-022-32531-6))

## Proportion of events in a given cluster size

> By looking at the tail of the probability offspring distribution, we can identify the size of the cluster of secondary infections. The probability that a cluster of secondary infections caused by a primary case identified by backward tracing has a size of $X$ or larger ([Endo et al., 2020](https://wellcomeopenresearch.org/articles/5-239/v3)).

Author: added in https://github.com/epiverse-trace/tutorials-middle/pull/29/commits/463c3de43088b589f9e5d012525590f45eb87124

```{r}
# estimate the probability of
# having a cluster size of 5, 10, or 25
# secondary cases from a primary case,
# given known reproduction number and
# dispersion parameter.
proportion_cluster_size(
  R = offspring_fit$estimate["mu"],
  k = offspring_fit$estimate["size"],
  cluster_size = c(5, 10, 25)
)

```

> Even though we have an $R<1$, given a highly overdispersed offspring distribution ($k=0.02$) we have a 46.9% probability to find a cluster of 25 people or larger. Then, by following a backwards strategy, contact tracing efforts will increase their probability to find the primary case and successfully contain and quarantine an increased proportion of contacts.

Author: added in 463c3de43.

> Note k=0.02 is a very overdispersed infection. Are there are any real examples of this? Would k=0.1 be more realistic?

this value is the one estimated from the MERS data set in https://github.com/epiverse-trace/tutorials-middle/blob/3e536a4a6406e5618c8e102c984ff6a9dbfe40f9/episodes/superspreading-estimate.Rmd#L321-L331

We can also use this number to prevent gathering of certain sized to reduce the epidemic by preventing potential superspreading events. Interventions can target to reduce the reproduction number in order to reduce the probability of having clusters of secondary cases.

::::::::::::::::::::::: challenge

> reuse ebola parameters? interpret

Author: moved to https://github.com/epiverse-trace/tutorials-middle/blob/6e4ed0cf4af9fedfce118c52b9b7b5b0b0d69995/episodes/superspreading-estimate.Rmd#L424

:::::::::::::::::::::::

> ## Superspreading in decision making

Author: this was moved to simulate episode. all suggestions homologised in https://github.com/epiverse-trace/tutorials-middle/pull/29/commits/7978d0edc3c6dd4b8589416047b234f5814cd683

> Transmission heterogeneity affects epidemic establishment and the ease of control ([Cori et al., 2017](https://royalsocietypublishing.org/doi/10.1098/rstb.2016.0371)). 

Author: moved to simulate episode and added in https://github.com/epiverse-trace/tutorials-middle/pull/29/commits/7978d0edc3c6dd4b8589416047b234f5814cd683

> + Greater heterogeneity reduces the chance of an outbreak emerging from single case. Individuals with more extreme amount of secondary cases are rare.

Author: moved to simulate episode and added in https://github.com/epiverse-trace/tutorials-middle/pull/29/commits/7978d0edc3c6dd4b8589416047b234f5814cd683

> + However, if the outbreak gets established, this heterogeneity can make an outbreak hard to control using *mass interventions* (which assumes transmission homogeneity), as a single uncontrolled case can generate a large number of secondary cases.

Author: moved to simulate episode and added in https://github.com/epiverse-trace/tutorials-middle/pull/29/commits/7978d0edc3c6dd4b8589416047b234f5814cd683

+ Conversely, heterogeneity in transmission may provide opportunities for *targeted interventions* if the individuals who contribute more to transmission (due to biological, environmental or behavioral factors) share socio-demographic or geographical characteristics that can be defined.

> We can have an early understanding of a disease epidemic potential from the mean reproduction number $R_{o}$ and dispersion $k$ of an offspring distribution to answer questions like:

Author: move to challenge in simulate episode. collected in https://github.com/epiverse-trace/tutorials-middle/pull/29/commits/dcc9e59bce80d37b6a6408c8d0b22d75bae180c1

> - What is the probability of an pathogen to cause large outbreak?

Author: move to challenge in simulate episode. collected in https://github.com/epiverse-trace/tutorials-middle/pull/29/commits/dcc9e59bce80d37b6a6408c8d0b22d75bae180c1

> - What is the probability of an outbreak to get extinct?

Author: move to challenge in simulate episode. collected in https://github.com/epiverse-trace/tutorials-middle/pull/29/commits/dcc9e59bce80d37b6a6408c8d0b22d75bae180c1

> - What is the probability to contain the ongoing outbreak?

Author: move to challenge in simulate episode. collected in https://github.com/epiverse-trace/tutorials-middle/pull/29/commits/dcc9e59bce80d37b6a6408c8d0b22d75bae180c1

Let's practice this using the `mers_korea_2015` linelist and contact data from the `{outbreaks}` package and integrate them with the `{epicontacts}` package to calculate the distribution of secondary cases during the 2015 MERS-CoV outbreak in South Korea ([Campbell, 2022](https://community.appliedepi.org/t/estimating-the-degree-of-super-spreading-from-transmission-chain-data/103/2)):

```{r}
## first, make an epicontacts object
epi_contacts <-
  epicontacts::make_epicontacts(
    linelist = mers_korea_2015$linelist,
    contacts = mers_korea_2015$contacts
  )
```

```{r,eval=FALSE}
# visualise contact network
epicontacts::vis_epicontacts(epi_contacts)
```

```{r,echo=FALSE}
# visualise contact network
network <-
  vis_epicontacts(epi_contacts) %>%
  visNetwork::visPhysics(solver = "barnesHut")

fname <- "network.html"

visNetwork::visSave(network, fname)

> webshot::webshot(

Author: @Degoot-AM actually this is expected. this is one additional combo required to render {visNetwork} as registered in https://github.com/epiverse-trace/tutorials/issues/98

```{r}
# no infector-infectee pairs are replicated
epi_contacts %>%
  pluck("contacts") %>%
  group_by(to) %>%
  filter(n() > 1)
```

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::

When each infector-infectee row is unique, the number of entries per infector corresponds to the number of secondary cases generated by that individual.

```{r}
# count secondary cases per infector
infector_secondary <- epi_contacts %>%
  pluck("contacts") %>%
  count(from, name = "secondary_cases")
```

But this output only contains number of secondary cases for reported infectors, not for each of the individuals in the whole `epicontacts` object.

To get this, first, we can use `epicontacts::get_id()` to get the full list of unique identifiers ("id") from the `epicontacts` class object. Second, join it with the count secondary cases per infector stored in the `infector_secondary` object. Third, replace the missing values with `0` to express no report of secondary cases from them.

```{r,message=FALSE,warning=FALSE}
all_secondary <- epi_contacts %>%
  # extract ids in contact *and* linelist using "which" argument
  epicontacts::get_id(which = "all") %>%
  # transform vector to dataframe to use left_join()

>   enframe(name = NULL, value = "from") %>%

Reviewer: This segment contains useful information bout  contacts data, and I it would be good to put in separate section.

Author: added as issue https://github.com/epiverse-trace/tutorials-middle/issues/65

**Negative binomial** distribution is specially useful for discrete data over an unbounded positive range whose sample variance exceeds the sample mean. In such terms, the observations are overdispersed with respect to a Poisson distribution, for which the mean is equal to the variance.

In epidemiology, [negative binomial](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Negative_binomial_distribution) have being used to model disease transmission for infectious diseases where the likely number of onward infections may vary considerably from individual to individual and from setting to setting, capturing all variation in infectious histories of individuals, including properties of the biological (i.e. degree of viral shedding) and environmental circumstances (e.g. type and location of contact).

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: challenge

Calculate the distribution of secondary cases for Ebola using the `ebola_sim_clean` object from `{outbreaks}` package.

> Does the offspring distribution of Ebola is skewed or overdispersed?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Is the offspring distribution of Ebola skewed or overdispersed?
```

:::::::::::::::::: hint

**Note:** This dataset has `r nrow(ebola_sim_clean$linelist)` cases. Running `epicontacts::vis_epicontacts()` may overload your session!

::::::::::::::::::

:::::::::::::::::: solution

```{r,message=FALSE,warning=FALSE}
## first, make an epicontacts object
ebola_contacts <-
  epicontacts::make_epicontacts(
    linelist = ebola_sim_clean$linelist,
    contacts = ebola_sim_clean$contacts
  )

# count secondary cases

ebola_infector_secondary <- ebola_contacts %>%
  pluck("contacts") %>%
  count(from, name = "secondary_cases")

ebola_secondary <- ebola_contacts %>%
  # extract ids in contact *and* linelist using "which" argument
  epicontacts::get_id(which = "all") %>%
  # transform vector to dataframe to use left_join()
  enframe(name = NULL, value = "from") %>%
  # join count secondary cases per infectee
  left_join(ebola_infector_secondary) %>%
  # infectee with missing secondary cases are replaced with zero
  replace_na(
    replace = list(secondary_cases = 0)
  )

## plot the distribution
ebola_secondary %>%
  ggplot(aes(secondary_cases)) +
  geom_histogram(binwidth = 1) +
  labs(
    x = "Number of secondary cases",
    y = "Frequency"

>   )

Reviewer 2: May I suggest beautifying this plot slightly with custom fill and line attributes?

Author: fair suggestion that may apply to other plots here. I'm trying to keep plots with minimal format lines because learners will need to reuse them to visualize the package outputs. Long ggplot lines may cause a blocker into the lesson aims. What we must apply is homogeneity across plots in all tutorials, so this is a pending issue. filled in #63

```

From a visual inspection, the distribution of secondary cases for the Ebola data set in `ebola_sim_clean` shows an skewed distribution with secondary cases equal or lower than 6. We need to complement this observation with a statistical analysis to evaluate for overdispersion.

::::::::::::::::::

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

## Estimate the dispersion parameter

> To empirically estimate the dispersion parameter $k$, we can to fit a negative binomial distribution to the number of secondary cases.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To empirically estimate the dispersion parameter $k$, we could fit a negative binomial distribution to the number of secondary cases.
```

  group_by(disease) %>%
  filter(percent_transmission < 0.98, percent_transmission > 0.85) %>%
  slice_max(percent_transmission) %>%
  ungroup() %>%
  mutate(disease = case_when(
    str_detect(disease, stringr::fixed("Hantavirus")) ~ "Hantavirus",
    str_detect(disease, stringr::fixed("Ebola")) ~ "Ebola",
    TRUE ~ disease
  ))

across_offspring %>%
  ggplot() +
  geom_line(
    aes(
      x = percent_cases,
      y = percent_transmission,
      color = dispersion,
      group = disease
    )
  ) +
  geom_text(
    data = across_offspring_tip,
    aes(
      x = percent_cases,
      y = percent_transmission,
      label = disease
    ),
    hjust = 0.0,
    vjust = 1.0,
    angle = 25,
    size = 3
  ) +
  scale_y_continuous(breaks = scales::breaks_pretty(n = 5)) +
  colorspace::scale_color_continuous_diverging(trans = "log10") +
  labs(
    x = "Proportion of infectious cases (ranked)",
    y = "Expected proportion of transmission",
    color = "Dispersion\nparameter (k)"
  ) +
  # geom_hline(aes(yintercept = 0.8),lty = 3) +
  geom_vline(aes(xintercept = 0.2), lty = 2) +
  coord_fixed(ratio = 1)
```

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

> ## Backward and forward contact tracing

Reviewer 2: This is quite sudden. You could retitle it as "Controlling superspreading events with contact tracing".

Author: done in https://github.com/epiverse-trace/tutorials-middle/commit/2679788c061c063b3f26fbfffad770621fe57f6c

```{r}
# get mean
ebola_mu_mid <- ebola_offspring$estimate["mu"]

# get 99th-percentile from poisson distribution
# with mean equal to mu
qpois(
  p = 0.99,
  lambda = ebola_mu_mid
)
```

Compare this values with the ones reported by [Lloyd-Smith et al., 2005](https://www.nature.com/articles/nature04153). See figure below:

![Reported superspreading events (SSEs; diamonds) relative to estimated reproduction number R (squares) for twelve directly transmitted infections. Lines show 5–95 percentile range of the number of secondary cases following a Poisson distribution with lambda equal to the reproduction number ($Z∼Poisson(R)$), and crosses show the 99th-percentile proposed as threshold for SSEs. Stars represent SSEs caused by more than one source case. ‘Other’ diseases are: 1, Streptococcus group A; 2, Lassa fever; 3, Mycoplasma pneumonia; 4, pneumonic plague; 5, tuberculosis. R is not shown for ‘other’ diseases, and is off-scale for monkeypox.](fig/SEE-individual-reproductive-number-fig-d.png)

:::::::::::::::::

::::::::::::::::::::::::

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: challenge

### Expected proportion of transmission

> What is the proportion of cases that are responsible of the 80% of transmission?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
What is the proportion of cases responsible for 80% of transmission?
```

Use `{superspreading}` and compare the estimates for **MERS** using the offspring distributions parameters from this tutorial episode, with **SARS-1** and **Ebola** offspring distributions parameter accessible via the `{epiparameter}` R package.

::::::::::::::::::::: hint

To use `superspreading::proportion_transmission()` we recommend to read the [Estimate what proportion of cases cause a certain proportion of transmission](https://epiverse-trace.github.io/superspreading/reference/proportion_transmission.html) reference manual.

```{r,message=FALSE,warning=FALSE,echo=FALSE}
library(epiparameter)

epidist_string <- epidist_db(
  epi_dist = "offspring distribution"
) %>%
  list_distributions() %>%
  dplyr::select(disease) %>%
  distinct() %>%
  pull() %>%
  paste(collapse = ", ")
```

> Currently, `{epiparameter}` have offspring distributions for `r epidist_string`. Let's access the offspring distribution `mean` and `dispersion` parameters for SARS-1:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Currently, `{epiparameter}` has offspring distributions for `r epidist_string`. Let's access the offspring distribution `mean` and `dispersion` parameters for SARS-1:
```
